---
layout: post
title: Regression_Project
---
For my regression project I decided to analyze a data set that ranks video games by total sales to see if I could predict the sales of a video game. I chose to use the critic score, user score, ESRB rating, and genre of a given game to predict its total sales. Because the data set included many other variables, such as year, sales in specific regions, developer, publisher, and name of the game, I had to drop those variables in order to isolate the variables that I thought would be correlated to sales. Then, because the ESRB rating and the genre of a game are categorical variables, I created a one hot matrix of each variable and removed them from the original data-frame. I then did a correlation of each of the remaining variables with total sales, and saw that critic score was the most correlated. After creating a pair plot to visualize the data, I saw that the other numerical variables were exponentially correlated with the total sales, so I created a column in the data-frame that was the logarithm of total sales and dropped total sales from the data-frame. For the logarithm of total sales to exist, I had to then drop every game that had not sold any copies from the data set. I created a new variable to store the logarithm of total sales, and then dropped log_total_sales from the main data-frame. After I isolated the numerical variables in the data-frame, scaled them using standard scaler and tested multiple degrees of polynomial regression on them to see which degree polynomial fit them best. I then created a pipeline that would first model the data to the optimal degree polynomial, which was a third degree polynomial, and would then use StandardScaler to scale the data. I then joined the one hot matrices to the data-frame and applied RidgeCV, which found me my optimal equation. This equation was -1.729 + 0.094x1(Action) + 0.236x2(Action-Adventure) -  0.146x3(Adventure) + ... The model had a mean squared error 1.814 with the best alpha of 1, and the test to find the best polynomial degree showed that the test and train errors were close. The R^2 of the model was 0.159, with the adjusted R^2 being 0.156, implying that one cannot easily predict the sales of a video game. There is not much bias in this model, as the model is simply trying to predict the total sales of a video games based on its critic score, user score, ESRB rating, and genre, but if the model was then used to decide what types of video games to create with total sales being optimized, only rated M shooters would be produced.